docs/client-tools-continuation.md, before:

# Client-Side Tools and Auto-Continuation

## Overview

Tools in `AIChatAgent` can be divided into two categories:

- **Server tools**: Have an `execute` function on the server. The AI SDK runs them automatically and the LLM continues responding in the same turn.
- **Client tools**: No `execute` function on the server. The tool call is sent to the client via `onToolCall`, and the client provides the result. By default, this requires a new request to continue.

With `autoContinueAfterToolResult`, client tools can behave like server tools -- the LLM calls a tool, the client executes it, and the server automatically continues the conversation in the same turn.

## Server Setup

Define a tool without an `execute` function. The AI SDK will pause and send `tool-input-available` to the client:

```typescript
import { AIChatAgent } from "@cloudflare/ai-chat";
import { createWorkersAI } from "workers-ai-provider";
import { streamText, tool, convertToModelMessages, stepCountIs } from "ai";
import { z } from "zod";

export class MyAgent extends AIChatAgent {
  async onChatMessage() {
    const workersai = createWorkersAI({ binding: this.env.AI });

    const result = streamText({
      model: workersai("@cf/zai-org/glm-4.7-flash"),
      messages: await convertToModelMessages(this.messages),
      tools: {
        // Client-side tool: no execute function
        getUserLocation: tool({
          description: "Get the user's location from their browser",
          inputSchema: z.object({})
        }),

        // Server-side tool: has execute, runs automatically
        getWeather: tool({
          description: "Get weather for a city",
          inputSchema: z.object({ city: z.string() }),
          execute: async ({ city }) => fetchWeather(city)
        })
      },
      stopWhen: stepCountIs(5) // Allow multi-step so the LLM can respond after tool results
    });

    return result.toUIMessageStreamResponse();
  }
}
```

## Client Setup

Use `onToolCall` to handle client-side tool execution. Auto-continuation is enabled by default (`autoContinueAfterToolResult: true`), so the server automatically calls `onChatMessage()` again after receiving the tool result, letting the LLM continue in the same assistant message.

```tsx
import { useAgent } from "agents/react";
import { useAgentChat } from "@cloudflare/ai-chat/react";

function Chat() {
  const agent = useAgent({ agent: "MyAgent" });

  const { messages, sendMessage } = useAgentChat({
    agent,
    // Auto-continuation is enabled by default — no need to set this explicitly
    // autoContinueAfterToolResult: true,
    onToolCall: async ({ toolCall, addToolOutput }) => {
      if (toolCall.toolName === "getUserLocation") {
        const pos = await new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
          navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition(resolve, reject);
        });
        addToolOutput({
          toolCallId: toolCall.toolCallId,
          output: {
            lat: pos.coords.latitude,
            lng: pos.coords.longitude
          }
        });
      }
    }
  });

  // Render messages...
}
```

## How It Works

```
User: "What's the weather near me?"

1. Client sends message → Server calls LLM
2. LLM decides to call getUserLocation (no server execute)
3. Stream sends tool-input-available to client
4. onToolCall fires → client gets geolocation → sends CF_AGENT_TOOL_RESULT
5. Server receives result with autoContinue: true
6. Server waits for the original stream to complete
7. Server calls onChatMessage() again (continuation)
8. LLM sees the location result, calls getWeather (server execute)
9. LLM responds: "It's sunny and 72°F near you!"
10. Continuation parts are merged into the same assistant message
```

The user sees a single seamless response, even though it involved a client-side tool call mid-stream.

## Without Auto-Continuation

When `autoContinueAfterToolResult` is set to `false`, the client must explicitly send a follow-up message after providing the tool result:

```tsx
const { messages, sendMessage, addToolOutput } = useAgentChat({
  agent,
  onToolCall: async ({ toolCall, addToolOutput: provide }) => {
    if (toolCall.toolName === "getUserLocation") {
      const pos = await getPosition();
      provide({
        toolCallId: toolCall.toolCallId,
        output: { lat: pos.coords.latitude, lng: pos.coords.longitude }
      });
    }
  }
  autoContinueAfterToolResult: false, // Disable auto-continuation
});

// After tool result is provided, send a follow-up to continue
// This creates a new assistant message rather than continuing the existing one
```

Use this when you want explicit control over when the conversation continues, or when tool results need user review before proceeding.

## Combining with `needsApproval`

You can use client-side tools and approval together. For example, a tool that needs both user approval and browser execution:

```typescript
// Server: tool with needsApproval but no execute
const shareLocation = tool({
  description: "Share the user's location with a third party",
  inputSchema: z.object({ service: z.string() }),
  needsApproval: true
  // No execute - client handles after approval
});
```

```tsx
// Client: handle approval, then execute
const { addToolApprovalResponse } = useAgentChat({
  agent,
  autoContinueAfterToolResult: true,
  onToolCall: async ({ toolCall, addToolOutput }) => {
    if (toolCall.toolName === "shareLocation") {
      const pos = await getPosition();
      addToolOutput({
        toolCallId: toolCall.toolCallId,
        output: { lat: pos.coords.latitude, lng: pos.coords.longitude }
      });
    }
  }
});
```

The flow becomes: LLM calls tool → user approves → client executes → server auto-continues.

## Related Docs

- [Chat Agents](./chat-agents.md) — Full `AIChatAgent` and `useAgentChat` reference
- [Human in the Loop](./human-in-the-loop.md) — Approval patterns including `needsApproval`

Commit message:

feat(ai-chat): support addToolOutput for approval states and custom denial messages (#967)

docs/client-tools-continuation.md, after:

# Client-Side Tools and Auto-Continuation

## Overview

Tools in `AIChatAgent` can be divided into two categories:

- **Server tools**: Have an `execute` function on the server. The AI SDK runs them automatically and the LLM continues responding in the same turn.
- **Client tools**: No `execute` function on the server. The tool call is sent to the client via `onToolCall`, and the client provides the result. By default, this requires a new request to continue.

With `autoContinueAfterToolResult`, client tools can behave like server tools -- the LLM calls a tool, the client executes it, and the server automatically continues the conversation in the same turn.

## Server Setup

Define a tool without an `execute` function. The AI SDK will pause and send `tool-input-available` to the client:

```typescript
import { AIChatAgent } from "@cloudflare/ai-chat";
import { createWorkersAI } from "workers-ai-provider";
import { streamText, tool, convertToModelMessages, stepCountIs } from "ai";
import { z } from "zod";

export class MyAgent extends AIChatAgent {
  async onChatMessage() {
    const workersai = createWorkersAI({ binding: this.env.AI });

    const result = streamText({
      model: workersai("@cf/zai-org/glm-4.7-flash"),
      messages: await convertToModelMessages(this.messages),
      tools: {
        // Client-side tool: no execute function
        getUserLocation: tool({
          description: "Get the user's location from their browser",
          inputSchema: z.object({})
        }),

        // Server-side tool: has execute, runs automatically
        getWeather: tool({
          description: "Get weather for a city",
          inputSchema: z.object({ city: z.string() }),
          execute: async ({ city }) => fetchWeather(city)
        })
      },
      stopWhen: stepCountIs(5) // Allow multi-step so the LLM can respond after tool results
    });

    return result.toUIMessageStreamResponse();
  }
}
```

## Client Setup

Use `onToolCall` to handle client-side tool execution. Auto-continuation is enabled by default (`autoContinueAfterToolResult: true`), so the server automatically calls `onChatMessage()` again after receiving the tool result, letting the LLM continue in the same assistant message.

```tsx
import { useAgent } from "agents/react";
import { useAgentChat } from "@cloudflare/ai-chat/react";

function Chat() {
  const agent = useAgent({ agent: "MyAgent" });

  const { messages, sendMessage } = useAgentChat({
    agent,
    // Auto-continuation is enabled by default — no need to set this explicitly
    // autoContinueAfterToolResult: true,
    onToolCall: async ({ toolCall, addToolOutput }) => {
      if (toolCall.toolName === "getUserLocation") {
        const pos = await new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
          navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition(resolve, reject);
        });
        addToolOutput({
          toolCallId: toolCall.toolCallId,
          output: {
            lat: pos.coords.latitude,
            lng: pos.coords.longitude
          }
        });
      }
    }
  });

  // Render messages...
}
```

## How It Works

```
User: "What's the weather near me?"

1. Client sends message → Server calls LLM
2. LLM decides to call getUserLocation (no server execute)
3. Stream sends tool-input-available to client
4. onToolCall fires → client gets geolocation → sends CF_AGENT_TOOL_RESULT
5. Server receives result with autoContinue: true
6. Server waits for the original stream to complete
7. Server calls onChatMessage() again (continuation)
8. LLM sees the location result, calls getWeather (server execute)
9. LLM responds: "It's sunny and 72°F near you!"
10. Continuation parts are merged into the same assistant message
```

The user sees a single seamless response, even though it involved a client-side tool call mid-stream.

## Without Auto-Continuation

When `autoContinueAfterToolResult` is set to `false`, the client must explicitly send a follow-up message after providing the tool result:

```tsx
const { messages, sendMessage, addToolOutput } = useAgentChat({
  agent,
  onToolCall: async ({ toolCall, addToolOutput: provide }) => {
    if (toolCall.toolName === "getUserLocation") {
      const pos = await getPosition();
      provide({
        toolCallId: toolCall.toolCallId,
        output: { lat: pos.coords.latitude, lng: pos.coords.longitude }
      });
    }
  }
  autoContinueAfterToolResult: false, // Disable auto-continuation
});

// After tool result is provided, send a follow-up to continue
// This creates a new assistant message rather than continuing the existing one
```

Use this when you want explicit control over when the conversation continues, or when tool results need user review before proceeding.

## Combining with `needsApproval`

You can use client-side tools and approval together. For example, a tool that needs both user approval and browser execution:

```typescript
// Server: tool with needsApproval but no execute
const shareLocation = tool({
  description: "Share the user's location with a third party",
  inputSchema: z.object({ service: z.string() }),
  needsApproval: true
  // No execute - client handles after approval
});
```

```tsx
// Client: handle approval, then execute
const { addToolApprovalResponse } = useAgentChat({
  agent,
  autoContinueAfterToolResult: true,
  onToolCall: async ({ toolCall, addToolOutput }) => {
    if (toolCall.toolName === "shareLocation") {
      const pos = await getPosition();
      addToolOutput({
        toolCallId: toolCall.toolCallId,
        output: { lat: pos.coords.latitude, lng: pos.coords.longitude }
      });
    }
  }
});
```

The flow becomes: LLM calls tool → user approves → client executes → server auto-continues.

If the user denies the tool instead, you can provide a custom error message using `addToolOutput` with `state: "output-error"`:

```tsx
// Deny with a reason instead of generic rejection
addToolOutput({
  toolCallId: toolCall.toolCallId,
  state: "output-error",
  errorText: "User declined to share location"
});
```

## Related Docs

- [Chat Agents](./chat-agents.md) — Full `AIChatAgent` and `useAgentChat` reference
- [Human in the Loop](./human-in-the-loop.md) — Approval patterns including `needsApproval`
