docs/mcp-transports.md, before:

# MCP Transports

This guide explains the different transport options for connecting to MCP servers with the Agents SDK.

For a primer on MCP Servers and how they are implemented in the Agents SDK with `McpAgent`[here](docs/mcp-servers.md)

## Streamable HTTP Transport (Recommended)

The **Streamable HTTP** transport is the recommended way to connect to MCP servers.

### How it works

When a client connects to your MCP server:

1. The client makes an HTTP request to your Worker with a JSON-RPC message in the body
2. Your Worker upgrades the connection to a WebSocket
3. The WebSocket connects to your `McpAgent` Durable Object which manages connection state
4. JSON-RPC messages flow bidirectionally over the WebSocket
5. Your Worker streams responses back to the client using Server-Sent Events (SSE)

This is all handled automatically by the `McpAgent.serve()` method:

```typescript
import { McpAgent } from "agents/mcp";
import { McpServer } from "@modelcontextprotocol/sdk/server/mcp.js";

export class MyMCP extends McpAgent {
  server = new McpServer({ name: "Demo", version: "1.0.0" });

  async init() {
    // Define your tools, resources, prompts
  }
}

// Serve with Streamable HTTP transport
export default MyMCP.serve("/mcp");
```

The `serve()` method returns a Worker with a `fetch` handler that:

- Handles CORS preflight requests
- Manages WebSocket upgrades
- Routes messages to your Durable Object

### Connection from clients

Clients connect using the `streamable-http` transport:

```typescript
await agent.addMcpServer("my-server", "https://your-worker.workers.dev/mcp");
```

## SSE Transport (Deprecated)

We also support the legacy **SSE (Server-Sent Events)** transport, but it's deprecated in favor of Streamable HTTP.

If you need SSE transport for compatibility:

```typescript
// Server
export default MyMCP.serveSSE("/sse");

// Client
await agent.addMcpServer("my-server", url, callbackHost);
```

## RPC Transport (Experimental)

The **RPC transport** is a custom transport designed for internal applications where your MCP server and agent are both running on Cloudflare. They can even run in the same Worker! It sends JSON-RPC messages directly over Cloudflare's RPC bindings without going over the public internet.

### Why use RPC transport?

- **Faster**: No network overhead - direct function calls
- **Simpler**: No HTTP endpoints, no connection management
- **Internal only**: Perfect for agents calling MCP servers within the same Worker

**Note**: RPC transport does not support authentication. Use HTTP/SSE for external connections that require OAuth.

### Connecting an Agent to an McpAgent via RPC

The RPC transport uses Durable Object bindings to connect your `Agent` (MCP client) directly to your `McpAgent` (MCP server).

#### Step 1: Define your MCP server

Create your `McpAgent` with the tools you want to expose:

```typescript
import { McpAgent } from "agents/mcp";
import { McpServer } from "@modelcontextprotocol/sdk/server/mcp.js";
import { z } from "zod";

type State = { counter: number };

export class MyMCP extends McpAgent<Env, State> {
  server = new McpServer({ name: "MyMCP", version: "1.0.0" });
  initialState: State = { counter: 0 };

  async init() {
    this.server.tool(
      "add",
      "Add to the counter",
      { amount: z.number() },
      async ({ amount }) => {
        this.setState({ counter: this.state.counter + amount });
        return {
          content: [
            {
              type: "text",
              text: `Added ${amount}, total is now ${this.state.counter}`
            }
          ]
        };
      }
    );
  }
}
```

#### Step 2: Connect your Agent to the MCP server

In your `Agent`, call `addMcpServer()` with the Durable Object binding in `onStart()`:

```typescript
import { AIChatAgent } from "agents/ai-chat-agent";

export class Chat extends AIChatAgent<Env> {
  async onStart(): Promise<void> {
    // Pass the DO namespace binding directly
    await this.addMcpServer("my-mcp", this.env.MyMCP);
  }

  async onChatMessage(onFinish) {
    const allTools = this.mcp.getAITools();

    const result = streamText({
      model,
      tools: allTools
      // ...
    });

    return createUIMessageStreamResponse({ stream: result });
  }
}
```

RPC connections are automatically restored after Durable Object hibernation, just like HTTP connections. The binding name and props are persisted to storage so the connection can be re-established without any extra code.

#### Step 3: Configure Durable Object bindings

In your `wrangler.jsonc`, define bindings for both Durable Objects:

```jsonc
{
  "durable_objects": {
    "bindings": [
      { "name": "Chat", "class_name": "Chat" },
      { "name": "MyMCP", "class_name": "MyMCP" }
    ]
  },
  "migrations": [
    {
      "new_sqlite_classes": ["MyMCP", "Chat"],
      "tag": "v1"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Step 4: Set up your Worker fetch handler

Route requests to your Chat agent:

```typescript
import { routeAgentRequest } from "agents";

export default {
  async fetch(request: Request, env: Env, ctx: ExecutionContext) {
    const url = new URL(request.url);

    // Optionally expose the MCP server via HTTP as well
    if (url.pathname.startsWith("/mcp")) {
      return MyMCP.serve("/mcp").fetch(request, env, ctx);
    }

    const response = await routeAgentRequest(request, env);
    if (response) return response;

    return new Response("Not found", { status: 404 });
  }
};
```

### Passing props from client to server

Since RPC transport does not have an OAuth flow, you can pass user context (like userId, role, etc.) directly as props:

```typescript
await this.addMcpServer("my-mcp", this.env.MyMCP, {
  props: { userId: "user-123", role: "admin" }
});
```

Your `McpAgent` can then access these props:

```typescript
export class MyMCP extends McpAgent<
  Env,
  State,
  { userId?: string; role?: string }
> {
  async init() {
    this.server.tool("whoami", "Get current user info", {}, async () => {
      const userId = this.props?.userId || "anonymous";
      const role = this.props?.role || "guest";

      return {
        content: [{ type: "text", text: `User ID: ${userId}, Role: ${role}` }]
      };
    });
  }
}
```

The props are:

- **Type-safe**: TypeScript extracts the Props type from your McpAgent generic
- **Persistent**: Stored in Durable Object storage via `updateProps()`
- **Available immediately**: Set before any tool calls are made

This is useful for:

- User authentication context
- Tenant/organization IDs
- Feature flags or permissions
- Any per-connection configuration

### How RPC transport works under the hood

When you call `addMcpServer()` with a Durable Object binding, the SDK:

1. Creates an `RPCClientTransport` that wraps the DO stub
2. Calls `handleMcpMessage()` on the `McpAgent` for each JSON-RPC message
3. The `McpAgent` routes messages through its `RPCServerTransport` to the MCP server
4. Responses flow back synchronously through the RPC call

This happens entirely within your Worker's execution context using Cloudflare's RPC mechanism - no HTTP, no WebSockets, no public internet.

The RPC transport fully supports:

- JSON-RPC 2.0 validation (via the MCP SDK's schema)
- Batch requests
- Notifications (messages without `id` field)
- Automatic reconnection after Durable Object hibernation (when called from `onStart()`)

### Configuring RPC Transport Server Timeout

The RPC transport has a configurable timeout for waiting for tool responses. By default, the server will wait **60 seconds** for a tool handler to respond. You can customize this by overriding `getRpcTransportOptions()` in your `McpAgent`:

```typescript
export class MyMCP extends McpAgent<Env, State> {
  server = new McpServer({ name: "MyMCP", version: "1.0.0" });

  protected getRpcTransportOptions() {
    return { timeout: 120000 }; // 2 minutes
  }

  async init() {
    this.server.tool(
      "long-running-task",
      "A tool that takes a while",
      { input: z.string() },
      async ({ input }) => {
        await longRunningOperation(input);
        return {
          content: [{ type: "text", text: "Task completed" }]
        };
      }
    );
  }
}
```

## Choosing a transport

| Transport           | Use when                              | Pros                                     | Cons                            |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| **Streamable HTTP** | External MCP servers, production apps | Standard protocol, secure, supports auth | Slight network overhead         |
| **RPC**             | Internal agents                       | Fastest, simplest setup                  | No auth, Service Bindings only  |
| **SSE**             | Legacy compatibility                  | Backwards compatible                     | Deprecated, use Streamable HTTP |

## Examples

- **Streamable HTTP**: See [`examples/mcp`](../examples/mcp)
- **RPC Transport**: See [`examples/mcp-rpc-transport`](../examples/mcp-rpc-transport)
- **MCP Client**: See [`examples/mcp-client`](../examples/mcp-client)

Commit message:

docs: protocol control, MCP RPC, and sync API docs
Document protocol message control and connection flags; add per-connection shouldSendProtocolMessages and isConnectionProtocolEnabled docs and note that CF_AGENT_* protocol frames are sent automatically. Add MCP transport docs and an RPC addMcpServer overload (Durable Object binding), note callbackHost behavior and deduplication of addMcpServer calls. Update queue and scheduling docs to reflect synchronous APIs (remove async from signatures), expand scheduling schema to show discriminated union shape, and add guidance for OpenAI strictJsonSchema when using the schema. Minor CHANGELOG formatting fix.

docs/mcp-transports.md, after:

# MCP Transports

This guide explains the different transport options for connecting to MCP servers with the Agents SDK.

For a primer on MCP Servers and how they are implemented in the Agents SDK with `McpAgent`[here](docs/mcp-servers.md)

## Streamable HTTP Transport (Recommended)

The **Streamable HTTP** transport is the recommended way to connect to MCP servers.

### How it works

When a client connects to your MCP server:

1. The client makes an HTTP request to your Worker with a JSON-RPC message in the body
2. Your Worker upgrades the connection to a WebSocket
3. The WebSocket connects to your `McpAgent` Durable Object which manages connection state
4. JSON-RPC messages flow bidirectionally over the WebSocket
5. Your Worker streams responses back to the client using Server-Sent Events (SSE)

This is all handled automatically by the `McpAgent.serve()` method:

```typescript
import { McpAgent } from "agents/mcp";
import { McpServer } from "@modelcontextprotocol/sdk/server/mcp.js";

export class MyMCP extends McpAgent {
  server = new McpServer({ name: "Demo", version: "1.0.0" });

  async init() {
    // Define your tools, resources, prompts
  }
}

// Serve with Streamable HTTP transport
export default MyMCP.serve("/mcp");
```

The `serve()` method returns a Worker with a `fetch` handler that:

- Handles CORS preflight requests
- Manages WebSocket upgrades
- Routes messages to your Durable Object

### Connection from clients

Clients connect using the `streamable-http` transport:

```typescript
await agent.addMcpServer("my-server", "https://your-worker.workers.dev/mcp");
```

## SSE Transport (Deprecated)

We also support the legacy **SSE (Server-Sent Events)** transport, but it's deprecated in favor of Streamable HTTP.

If you need SSE transport for compatibility:

```typescript
// Server
export default MyMCP.serveSSE("/sse");

// Client
await agent.addMcpServer("my-server", url, callbackHost);
```

## RPC Transport (Experimental)

The **RPC transport** is a custom transport designed for internal applications where your MCP server and agent are both running on Cloudflare. They can even run in the same Worker! It sends JSON-RPC messages directly over Cloudflare's RPC bindings without going over the public internet.

### Why use RPC transport?

- **Faster**: No network overhead - direct function calls
- **Simpler**: No HTTP endpoints, no connection management
- **Internal only**: Perfect for agents calling MCP servers within the same Worker

**Note**: RPC transport does not support authentication. Use HTTP/SSE for external connections that require OAuth.

### Connecting an Agent to an McpAgent via RPC

The RPC transport uses Durable Object bindings to connect your `Agent` (MCP client) directly to your `McpAgent` (MCP server).

#### Step 1: Define your MCP server

Create your `McpAgent` with the tools you want to expose:

```typescript
import { McpAgent } from "agents/mcp";
import { McpServer } from "@modelcontextprotocol/sdk/server/mcp.js";
import { z } from "zod";

type State = { counter: number };

export class MyMCP extends McpAgent<Env, State> {
  server = new McpServer({ name: "MyMCP", version: "1.0.0" });
  initialState: State = { counter: 0 };

  async init() {
    this.server.tool(
      "add",
      "Add to the counter",
      { amount: z.number() },
      async ({ amount }) => {
        this.setState({ counter: this.state.counter + amount });
        return {
          content: [
            {
              type: "text",
              text: `Added ${amount}, total is now ${this.state.counter}`
            }
          ]
        };
      }
    );
  }
}
```

#### Step 2: Connect your Agent to the MCP server

In your `Agent`, call `addMcpServer()` with the Durable Object binding in `onStart()`:

```typescript
import { AIChatAgent } from "agents/ai-chat-agent";

export class Chat extends AIChatAgent<Env> {
  async onStart(): Promise<void> {
    // Pass the DO namespace binding directly
    await this.addMcpServer("my-mcp", this.env.MyMCP);
  }

  async onChatMessage(onFinish) {
    const allTools = this.mcp.getAITools();

    const result = streamText({
      model,
      tools: allTools
      // ...
    });

    return createUIMessageStreamResponse({ stream: result });
  }
}
```

RPC connections are automatically restored after Durable Object hibernation, just like HTTP connections. The binding name and props are persisted to storage so the connection can be re-established without any extra code.

**Deduplication:** If `addMcpServer` is called with a name that already has an active connection, the existing connection is returned instead of creating a duplicate. This makes it safe to call `addMcpServer` in `onStart()` without worrying about creating multiple connections on restart.

#### Step 3: Configure Durable Object bindings

In your `wrangler.jsonc`, define bindings for both Durable Objects:

```jsonc
{
  "durable_objects": {
    "bindings": [
      { "name": "Chat", "class_name": "Chat" },
      { "name": "MyMCP", "class_name": "MyMCP" }
    ]
  },
  "migrations": [
    {
      "new_sqlite_classes": ["MyMCP", "Chat"],
      "tag": "v1"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Step 4: Set up your Worker fetch handler

Route requests to your Chat agent:

```typescript
import { routeAgentRequest } from "agents";

export default {
  async fetch(request: Request, env: Env, ctx: ExecutionContext) {
    const url = new URL(request.url);

    // Optionally expose the MCP server via HTTP as well
    if (url.pathname.startsWith("/mcp")) {
      return MyMCP.serve("/mcp").fetch(request, env, ctx);
    }

    const response = await routeAgentRequest(request, env);
    if (response) return response;

    return new Response("Not found", { status: 404 });
  }
};
```

### Passing props from client to server

Since RPC transport does not have an OAuth flow, you can pass user context (like userId, role, etc.) directly as props:

```typescript
await this.addMcpServer("my-mcp", this.env.MyMCP, {
  props: { userId: "user-123", role: "admin" }
});
```

Your `McpAgent` can then access these props:

```typescript
export class MyMCP extends McpAgent<
  Env,
  State,
  { userId?: string; role?: string }
> {
  async init() {
    this.server.tool("whoami", "Get current user info", {}, async () => {
      const userId = this.props?.userId || "anonymous";
      const role = this.props?.role || "guest";

      return {
        content: [{ type: "text", text: `User ID: ${userId}, Role: ${role}` }]
      };
    });
  }
}
```

The props are:

- **Type-safe**: TypeScript extracts the Props type from your McpAgent generic
- **Persistent**: Stored in Durable Object storage via `updateProps()`
- **Available immediately**: Set before any tool calls are made

This is useful for:

- User authentication context
- Tenant/organization IDs
- Feature flags or permissions
- Any per-connection configuration

### How RPC transport works under the hood

When you call `addMcpServer()` with a Durable Object binding, the SDK:

1. Creates an `RPCClientTransport` that wraps the DO stub
2. Calls `handleMcpMessage()` on the `McpAgent` for each JSON-RPC message
3. The `McpAgent` routes messages through its `RPCServerTransport` to the MCP server
4. Responses flow back synchronously through the RPC call

This happens entirely within your Worker's execution context using Cloudflare's RPC mechanism - no HTTP, no WebSockets, no public internet.

The RPC transport fully supports:

- JSON-RPC 2.0 validation (via the MCP SDK's schema)
- Batch requests
- Notifications (messages without `id` field)
- Automatic reconnection after Durable Object hibernation (when called from `onStart()`)

### Configuring RPC Transport Server Timeout

The RPC transport has a configurable timeout for waiting for tool responses. By default, the server will wait **60 seconds** for a tool handler to respond. You can customize this by overriding `getRpcTransportOptions()` in your `McpAgent`:

```typescript
export class MyMCP extends McpAgent<Env, State> {
  server = new McpServer({ name: "MyMCP", version: "1.0.0" });

  protected getRpcTransportOptions() {
    return { timeout: 120000 }; // 2 minutes
  }

  async init() {
    this.server.tool(
      "long-running-task",
      "A tool that takes a while",
      { input: z.string() },
      async ({ input }) => {
        await longRunningOperation(input);
        return {
          content: [{ type: "text", text: "Task completed" }]
        };
      }
    );
  }
}
```

## Choosing a transport

| Transport           | Use when                              | Pros                                     | Cons                            |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| **Streamable HTTP** | External MCP servers, production apps | Standard protocol, secure, supports auth | Slight network overhead         |
| **RPC**             | Internal agents                       | Fastest, simplest setup                  | No auth, Service Bindings only  |
| **SSE**             | Legacy compatibility                  | Backwards compatible                     | Deprecated, use Streamable HTTP |

## Examples

- **Streamable HTTP**: See [`examples/mcp`](../examples/mcp)
- **RPC Transport**: See [`examples/mcp-rpc-transport`](../examples/mcp-rpc-transport)
- **MCP Client**: See [`examples/mcp-client`](../examples/mcp-client)
